Hey everybody! Hey, super excited day two here. We have an awesome program in front
of us but I want to start by first again thanking our partners. Without them this
program would not be possible so I want to thank the GSIs and the hyperscalers
and all the ISVs that you see on this picture. Please go to the expo hall, check
out what they're up to. Okay, so we have a really awesome program in front of us
today. You're gonna hear from Texas Rangers, you're gonna hear from Duck TV
creator, you're gonna hear from Matej Zaharia who started the Spark project,
he's gonna talk about UC, we're gonna hear about Apache Iceberg from the
original creator of the project, Ryan Blue, and then we're gonna
hear from Deposit and RStudio Tarif and then Professor Yehchin from UW.
And then we have lots of lots of announcements today. Before I jump in I
wanted to quickly recap yesterday. So in case you missed it, yesterday we
talked about the acquisition of Tabular which was a company started by the
original creators of Apache Iceberg and what we talked about is how we intend to
bring these formats closer and closer together. Delta Lake and Apache Iceberg.
And if you want compatibility today or if you want interoperability today we
announced the GA of Uniform. So store your data in project Uniform, stands for
universal format, and you will get the best of both of those formats. Okay, we
got all the original creators of both of those projects, we're making sure that
Uniform really works well with both. So that was the first thing that we
announced. Second, we talked about Gen AI. And in Gen AI we kind of talked about
how lots of companies are focused on general intelligence, which is super cool.
Models that are really good at anything. You can ask them about history, math, and
so on. But we're focused on data intelligence. Data intelligence is not
just general intelligence, it's intelligence on your data, on your
custom data, on the proprietary data of your organization. Being able to do that
at a reasonable cost and with privacy intact. Okay, we talked about compound AI
systems and the agent framework that we released yesterday that lets you build
your own compound AI systems. Okay, and then we heard from Reynold yesterday
about data warehousing, and he talked about the performance improvements that
we've seen over the just last two years. So just BI workloads, concurrent workloads
on BI, we saw 73% improvement on the BI workloads that are running on Databricks
the last two years. Okay, so we're just tracking those over two years, it's a
massive improvement. So check it out. And then I was very excited about AIBI. So
AIBI was a project that we built from the ground up, with generative AI in
mind, to completely disrupt how we do BI today. So that's also available in
Databricks, so check it out. Okay, so that's what we did yesterday. Those were
the launches that we had yesterday. But today, let me see here, my clicker is not
working. How do we get to the next slide? Maybe one more time like that. No, maybe
it's out of battery. Okay, can someone go to the next slide, please? No.
Okay, we're just going to talk about this slide today, all right? All right,
something is happening. And now I'm worried about the next speaker. Okay, I
will introduce the next speaker. So next speaker, her name is Ye Qin, she's a
professor at UW. She's going to be talking about SLMs. Okay, what's SLMs?
Everybody's talking about large language models. These are small language models.
Okay, how do they work? What makes them tick? What's the secret sauce to make
SLMs work really, really well? Super excited to welcome on stage, Ye Qin.
All right, so I'm here to share with you impossible possibilities. So last year,
when Sam Altman was asked, how can Indian startups create foundation models for
India? He said, don't bother, it's hopeless. Whoa. First of all, I hope that
Indian startups didn't give up and will not give up. Second of all, this
conversation could have happened anywhere else, in US, any universities, or
startups, or research institute, without that much of compute. So here comes
impossible distillation. How to cook your small language models in an
environmentally friendly manner, and it tastes as good as the real thing. So
currently, what we hear as the winning recipe is extreme scale pre-training
followed by extreme scale post-training, such as RLHF. What if I told you, I'm
going to start with GPT-2, that small, low-quality model that nobody talks
about, and somehow, I don't know why, how, but somehow, we're going to create or
squeeze out high-quality small model, and then compete against much stronger
model, that may be two orders of magnitude larger. Now, this should really
sound impossible, especially when you might have heard of a paper like this,
that says the false promise of imitating proprietary large language models.
Although what they report is true for that particular evaluation experimental
setup they reported, please do not generalize, over-generalize, to conclude
that all the small language models are completely out of league. Because there
are numerous other counterexamples that demonstrate that task-specific symbolic
knowledge distillation can work across many different tasks and domains, some of
which are from my own lab. Today, though, let me just focus on one task, which is
going to be about how to learn to abstract in language. To simplify this
task, let's begin with the sentence summarization as our first mission
impossible. So here, the goal is to achieve this without extreme scale
pre-training, without RLHF at scale, and also without supervised data sets at
scale, because these things are not always necessarily available. But wait a
minute, we have to use usually all three, at least some of them, but how are we
supposed to do any good against larger model without any of this? So the key
intuition is that current AI is as good as the data that it was trained on. We
have to have some advantage, we cannot have a zero advantage, so that advantage
is going to come from data. By the way, we have to synthesize data, because if it
already exists somewhere on the internet, OpenAI has already crawled it, that's not
your advantage, they have it too. So you have to create something genuinely novel
that's even better than what's out there. So usually, distillation starts with
large model, but we're going to toss that out just to show you how we may be
blinded to the hidden possibilities. So I'm going to start, just for
demonstration purposes, with GPT-2, that poor, low-quality model, and then I'm
going to do some innovations, which I'm going to sketch in a bit, to make
high-quality data set that can then be used to train small model that will
become powerful model for a particular task. The only problem, though, is that
GPT-2 doesn't even understand your prompt, it cannot do prompt engineering
using GPT-2. You ask it to summarize your sentence, it generates some output,
that does not make any sense. So then you try again, because there's usually
randomness to it, you can sample many different examples, like hundreds of
examples, and we find that it's almost always no good, like less than 0.1%
good. Where there's a will, there can be a way. So we had multiple
different ideas that included our neurologic decoding. This is plug-and-play
inference time algorithm that can incorporate any logical constraints to
your language model output. For any off-the-shelf models, we can plug and
play this to guide the semantic space of the output. But because GPT-2 is so bad,
even with this, you know, the success ratio was only about 1%. But this is not
zero. Now we are going somewhere, because if you over-generate a lot of
samples and then filter out, you can actually gain some good examples this
way. And then students, brilliant students, came up with many different ideas. I'll
gloss over the technical details, but we found some ways to increase the chance
success ratio to beyond the 10%, just so that it's a little bit easier to find
good examples. So then overall framework goes to something like this. You start
with the poor teacher model, you over-generate a lot of the data points,
and then because there's a lot of noise in your data, you have to do serious
filtration. So here we use the three-layer filtration system. The
details are not very important, but let me highlight the first one,
Intelmonter filter, which was based on off-the-shelf Intelmonter classifier
that can tell you whether a summary is logically entailed from the original
text or not. This is off-the-shelf model, that's not perfect. It's maybe about 70
to 80% good, but it's good enough when you use this aggressively to filter out
your data. Then we use that data to train smaller model, much smaller model,
which can then become the teacher model for the next generation students. So we
repeat this a couple times to make, in the end, high-quality dim sum data and
high-quality model. When we evaluated this against the GPT-3, which was the
best model of that time, so this actually was done before ChatGPT came out, and we
were able to beat that GPT-3, which was at that time the best summarization
model out there. But since ChatGPT came out, people are like,
whatever, you know, ChatGPT can do everything, including summarization,
so why should we bother? So here comes Mission Impossible 2, where we are now
going to compete against ChatGPT 3.5, and to make the challenge even harder for us.
Now we are going to summarize documents, not just the sentences, and then we are
also going to do all of this above without relying on that off-the-shelf
Intel mount classifier. I mean, in practice you can do that, just like
academically we wanted to see how much can we push the boundary against the
commonly held assumption about the scale. So our new work, InfoSum, is
information-theoretic distillation method, where the key idea is instead of
that off-the-shelf Intel mount filtration system, we're going to use some
equations. That equation has actually only three lines of some conditional
probability scores that you can compute using off-the-shelf language models. It's
too early in the morning, so let's not drill into the details of the
equations, but I can just tell you hand-wavy that if you shuffle this
around, you can interpret this as special cases of pointwise mutual
information, which you can use for the purpose of filtering your data. So we
use the same overall framework as before. We now use the PTHEA 2.8 billion
parameter model because we liked it a little bit better than GPT-2, and for the
filtration, we are now using the three short equations that I showed you
earlier. And then we do the same business. This time, though, we make the model
even smaller, only 0.5 billion parameter model that leads to high-quality
summarization data set as well as model. So how well do we do? Well, as promised, we
do either as good as CHACHE PT 3.5, at least for this task, or we do better
depending on how you set up the evaluation challenges and benchmarks. So
you can check out more details in our paper. To summarize, I demonstrated how we
can learn to summarize documents even without relying on extreme
scale, pre-trained models, and many other things at scale. The
real research question underlying these two papers, though, is this idea about how
we can learn to abstract. Because right now, the recipe is, let's just make models
super big, the bigger the better. But humans, you and I, cannot really remember
all the contexts, you know, like a million tokens. Nobody can
remember a million tokens in your context. You just abstract away everything I
told you instantaneously, but you still remember what I just said so far. That's
really amazing human intelligence that we don't yet know how to build
efficiently through AI models, and I believe that's possible. We're just not
trying hard enough because we're blinded by just the magic of a scale.
Okay, so finally, Infinigram as the third mission impossible. So switching the
topic a little bit, now the mission is to make classical statistical N-gram
language models somehow relevant to neural language models. How many of you
even talk about N-gram models anymore? I don't know. Do you even learn this
these days? Here, we're gonna make N equals infinity. We're gonna compute this
over trillions of tokens, and the response time should be super
instantaneous, and we're not even going to use a single GPU on this. Like, wow.
Let me tell you how hard it is. So hypothetically, if you're gonna index
five trillion tokens in a classical N-gram language model with N equals
infinity, then you're, roughly speaking, looking at two quadrillions of unique
N-gram sequences that you somehow enumerate, sort, count, and store some
error, which might take maybe 32 terabytes of disk space, maybe more, who
knows, but it's too much. We cannot do that. And if you look at what other
large-scale classical N-gram models other people have ever built, it was
Google in 2007, due to Jeff Dean and others, who only scanned two trillion
tokens. I mean, it was a lot back then. Up to five N-grams, which
already give them about 300 billions of unique N-gram sequences that they have
to enumerate, to sort, count, etc. So it's too many. People didn't do beyond that
very much. So how on the earth is it possible that we can actually blow this
up to infinity? So before I reveal what we did, I invite you to go check out this
online demo, if you so desire. infinity-gram.io
So you can look up any token you want. Here's one
example highlighted, which has 48 characters. I don't know why that word
even exists, but not only it exists, if you look it up, there are like more than
three thousands of instances, and it shows you what millisecond it took. It's
5.5 millisecond it took, and then it also shows you how you can tokenize that
long word. You can also try multiple words to see which word comes next. So
for example, actions speak louder than what. So it's going to show you on the
web what are the other next word that comes, and you know, again, it's a super
fast. So what did we do? You'll be surprised to hear how simple this idea
actually is. So there's something called the suffix array that I think not all
algorithm classes teach, but some do. It's that data structure that's
implemented very carefully. So we index the entire web corpus using this suffix
array, and the truth is we don't pre-compute any of these n-gram
statistics. We just have this data structure ready to go, and when you call
a particular query, we compute this on the fly, but thanks to the data structure, we
can do this super fast, especially when you do C++ implementation. I know people
don't usually use that language anymore when it comes to AI research, but it's
good stuff that actually runs much faster. How cheap is this? So it's only a
few hundreds of dollars we spent for indexing the entire thing, and then even
for servicing the APIs, you can get away with a pretty low cost, and it's really
really fast. Even without GPUs, the latency for different types of API calls
are just a few tens of milliseconds. You can do a lot of things with this. So one
thing I can share with you right now is you can interpolate between your
neural language models with our InfiniGram to lower the perplexity, which
is the metric people often use for evaluating the quality of your language
model across the board. And this is only the tip of the iceberg that I expect
to see. I'm actually working on other stuff that I wish I could share, but I
cannot yet. But we started serving this API endpoint a few weeks ago, and
already we served 60 million API calls, not counting our own access, so I'm
really curious what people are doing with our InfiniGram. So concluding
remarks. The TLDR of my talk is that AI, at least in the current form, is as good
as the data that it was trained on. So the past and current AI usually depends
primarily on human-generated data, but it could really be that the future will
rely on AI-synthesized data. I know that there's a lot of concerns
about this, that maybe the quality is not very good, there may be bias, so you
cannot do this in a vanilla way. You should do it in a more innovative way,
but there are many evidences piling up that this actually works. So segment
anything by meta-sem is an example of AI-synthesized annotation on image
segmentations. Helped with human validation, but human alone couldn't
annotate that many examples of images. Here's another example. Textbooks are all
you need by Microsoft, if I want to three. Again this is a case where when
you have really high quality data, textbook quality data, synthesized, you
can actually compete against larger counterpart across many, many different
tasks. Maybe it's not as still general as larger models in some capacities, but
this is amazing to serve a lot of business needs, where you may not need
generalist, you may need a specialist. And also what textbook alludes to you is
that quality is what matters. It's not just brute force quantity, but it's
quality. DALI 3 is yet another example. Why is it better than DALI 2 out of a
sudden? Well in large part because of better captions. But which better
captions? The previous model used all the good captions. Well they synthesized
the captions. That's how you get high quality data. Of course you have to do
this with care, but there are many more piling examples of task-specific
symbolic knowledge distillation, including the work of my own lab, that
demonstrate that this could really make smaller models really unlock the hidden
capabilities of small models. So it's really about quality, novelty, and
diversity of your data, not just the quantity, and I'll end my talk here.
Thank you.
Awesome. Okay, so there we had it. Mission Impossible. So the secret sauce behind
these SLMs, small language models, is the data. Surprise. Okay, awesome. So back to
this slide. We saw it yesterday. So this is the Data Intelligence Platform, and
this is sort of guiding us different portions of the platform that we're
going through. We went through a bunch of them yesterday, and today the next level
that we're going to go through is Delta Lake and Uniform. So we have a talk on
Delta Lake. That was our agenda a month ago when we put this together, but it
turned out that, you know, we now have acquired company Tabular. So we really
really wanted you to hear from Ryan Blue, the original creator of Apache Iceberg.
So I want to welcome him on stage and bring him on here.
Hey, Ryan. Hey, good to be here. Awesome. Okay, so congratulations. Welcome to
Databricks. Thank you. We are really excited to be here and also excited to
get started on this new chapter in data formats. Awesome. So what's the main
benefit of joining Databricks? Why join forces? I, you know, I've never wanted
people to worry about formats. Formats have always been a way for us to take on
more responsibility as a platform and take responsibilities from people who,
you know, worry about things. When we started this, people were worrying about
whether or not things completed atomically. And so this next chapter is
really about how do we remove the the choice and the need to stress over, you
know, am I making this the right choice for the next ten years? That weighs a lot
on people. And I think we just, we want to make sure that everything is
compatible. That we're all, you know, running in the same direction with
the single standard, if possible. Hopefully we can get there. Yeah, I think
we're gonna get there. Actually, you had a talk, right, a while ago that said
something like, I want you to not know about, you know, these formats and
Iceberg. There was some title, right? Exactly. I don't want anyone thinking
about, you know, table formats or file formats or anything like that. That's a
massive distraction from what people actually want to get done in their jobs.
So I want people focusing on getting value out of their data and not the
minutiae. That's the kind of nerdy problem that, you know, I get excited
about. Leave that to us. Hey, I like it. As a nerd, I think it's awesome. We've got
thousands of people to learn how to do asset transactions and understand all
the underpinnings of the stuff that otherwise would not give a damn about.
Okay, well, everybody wants to hear, like, origin stories. So can you tell us a
little bit? How did Iceberg get started? What's the sort of history? Well, at
Netflix, we were really...
Talk a little bit about how you came up with the idea of this format, and what was the
start of history?
Well, at Netflix, we were really grappling with a number of different problem areas.
Atomicity was one, that we didn't trust transactions and what was happening to our data.
We also had issues like, you know, more correctness problems.
You couldn't rename a column properly and those sorts of things.
And we realized that the nexus of all of the user problems was the format level.
We just had too simplistic of a format with the Hive format, and we decided to do something
about it.
And then I think the real turning point was actually when we open-sourced it and started
working with the community, because it turns out everyone had that problem, and we could
just move so much faster with the community.
It's been an amazing experience.
And you started, you were involved in the starting of the Parquet project before that, right?
Was some of these thoughts even discussed to do this kind of atomicity and so on back there, or no?
So, part of my experience in the Parquet project informed what we did here, because there were
several things that just were not file-level issues.
They were this next level of, you know, really table-level concerns.
Like, what's the current schema of a table?
You can't tell that from just looking at all the files.
Yeah.
You know, a lot of people think that this is, you know, the first time we're talking
about these things, you know, you and I and others.
But this isn't the first time.
We're actually talking about interoperability and how to make this work, right?
That's true.
You know, we've been in touch over the years, you know, talking about this several times.
I'm glad that we finally got to the point where it made sense.
You know, I think we were always going and doing our own things, but now we've gotten
to the point where both formats are good enough that we're actually duplicating effort.
And the most logical thing to do is this.
It is to start working together, start, you know, avoiding any duplication if possible
between the two.
Yeah.
That's super awesome.
Okay.
So, I think a lot of people here are wondering, what does this mean for the Apache Iceberg
community?
Well, I'm really excited because I see this as a big commitment and a pretty massive investment
in the Iceberg community and the health of both Delta Lake and Iceberg in general.
I'm very excited, you know, personally to, like, work on this and do a whole bunch of
fun engineering problems.
And that'll be really nice.
Awesome, man.
So, we're super excited to partner with you, you know, collaborate on Delta, Uniform, Iceberg,
all these formats, and then, you know, make it such that no one here ever needs to care
about this ever again.
Thanks so much.
Thank you.
Okay.
So, now, as I said, originally this talk was just going to be about Delta.
So now I want to welcome to stage the CTO of data warehousing at Databricks, Sean Hovsepian,
to talk about Delta and Uniform.
Welcome.
Thanks, Ali.
And a lot of us, we used to work together with Ryan in the past, and it's really exciting
to have him here so we can work together again.
So this talk is going to be very exciting.
Delta Lake.
First of all, I'm going to announce the general availability of Delta Lake Uniform.
What is Uniform?
Really, it's just short for two words, universal format.
It's our approach to allow full lake house format interoperability.
See, with all of these different formats, Delta, Iceberg, Hudi, it's essentially a collection
of data files in parquet and a little bit of metadata on the side.
All of the formats use the same MVCC transactional techniques to keep that together.
And so we thought to ourselves, in this age of LLMs, transforming language left and right,
couldn't we just find a way to translate that metadata into different formats so that you
just need to have one copy, and that's exactly what we're doing with Uniform.
The Uniform GA allows you to essentially write data as Delta and be able to read it as Iceberg,
And we've worked very closely with the Apache Xtable and Hudi team to make that possible.
And we're going to be working with the Iceberg team to make that even better.
The great thing about Uniform is there's barely a noticeable performance overhead.
It's super fast.
You get awesome features like liquid clustering.
There's support for all of the different data types from map, lists, arrays.
And best of all, it's got a production-ready catalog.
With UC and Uniform, it's one of the only live implementations of the Iceberg REST catalog
API, and that's available for everybody using Uniform.
There have been over 4 exabytes of data that have already been loaded through Uniform.
We have hundreds of customers using it, and one of them, in particular, mScience, as you
can see here, was very happy that they were able to have one copy of their data, which
allowed them to reduce costs and have better time to value.
And it's innovations like Uniform that are really making Delta Lake the most adopted
open lakehouse format.
There have been over 9 exabytes of data processed on Delta yesterday.
Over a billion clusters per year using it.
And this is tremendous growth.
It's 2x more than last year.
And if you're like me, and when you saw these numbers, I did not believe 9 exabytes.
I literally, up until yesterday, were going back, looking at the code, making sure they
calculated it correctly, because it's just a tremendous amount of data every day that's
going into Delta.
And it's adopted by a large percentage of the Fortune 500, 10,000-plus companies in
production, lots of new features.
But most interestingly, it's sort of that last number.
There are over 500 contributors.
And best of all, according to the Linux Foundation, and this is their project analytics site,
it's open, anyone can go to it today, over about 66% of contributions to Delta come from
companies outside of Databricks.
And it's this community that just really makes us super excited and enables a ton of these
features that are now available.
And these are time-tested, awesome, innovative functionality.
Things like change data feed, log compaction.
I love the row IDs feature that just came out.
But there are things like deletion vectors.
Deletion vectors are a way that allow you to do fast updates and DML to your data.
In many cases, it's 10 times faster than merge used to be.
So if you have DBT workloads or you're doing lots of operational changes to data, deletion
vectors make your life easier.
And there have been over 100 trillion row rewrites that have been saved because of these
deletion vector features.
And it's enabled by default for all Databricks users.
And so it's through these features that we've also been able to unlock access to this amazing
ecosystem of tools that support Delta.
And with Uniform, that's now GA, we're able to get the same access to the Hudi and Iceberg
ecosystem.
So if you have tools and SDKs, applications that work in there, they're all part of the
Delta family now, thanks to Uniform.
And there's been some great improvements to a lot of the connectors, the Trino, Rust connector,
lots of awesome innovation happening here.
And a lot of that is thanks to this new thing that we've developed called Delta Kernel.
Essentially, at the core of all of this, there's a small library that you can just plug and
play into your applications or SDKs that contains all the logic for the Delta formats, all the
version changes, new features, and it's making it so much easier for people to integrate
and adopt Delta, and most importantly, stay up to date with the latest features.
And we've been seeing this.
The Delta Rust connector is community supported and has amazing traction.
Just a few weeks ago at Google's I-O conference, I believe, BigQuery introduced complete support
for Delta.
And very recently, DuckDB added full support for Delta.
And the best part of this is we have Hannes here, who's the co-founder, one of the co-creators
of DuckDB, CEO of DuckDB Labs, professor of computer science, who's going to talk to us
a little bit about how they integrated Delta into DuckDB.
Hannes, get over here.
Hey.
Thank you so much.
Yes, hello and very good morning.
It's wonderful to see all of you here.
I have to adjust my eyes a bit to the amount of people.
As Shanta said, I'm one of the people behind DuckDB.
So for those of you who do not know what is DuckDB, it's a small in-process analytical
data management system, speaks SQL, has zero dependencies, and I'm having a lot of fun
working on it with a growing team.
And last year, I talked about DuckDB on this very stage for the first time.
And it was very exciting.
But also lots of things have happened since then in DuckDB land.
There's been an incredible growth in adoption for DuckDB.
We're seeing all sorts of crazy things.
And here, as an example, it's just the stars on GitHub have doubled within a year to almost
20,000.
And in fact, we're so close to 20,000.
So if you want to like it today, then maybe we'll beat it.
But what also happened, and just last week, we actually released DuckDB 1.0.
And that was a big moment for us.
It was the culmination of six years of R&D in data management systems.
And what does 1.0 mean?
That means that we have now a stable SQL dialect and various APIs.
And most importantly, our storage format for DuckDB is going to be backwards compatible
from now on out.
But maybe taking a little bit of a step back, how does DuckDB fit into a general ecosystem?
If you look at the world's most widely used data tools, Excel, and we look at a very capable
system like Spark, there's still a pretty big gap.
There's a lot of data sets that are not going to work in Excel, but they are maybe a bit
too small to actually throw Spark at them.
So DuckDB is really perfect for this last mile of data analysis, where you may not need
a whole data center to compute something.
So for example, you have already gone through your log files in Spark.
And now it's time to do some last mile analysis with DuckDB, doing some plots, what have you.
That's where DuckDB fits into this big picture.
But now we have to somehow get the data from Spark to DuckDB.
So how are we going to do that?
Obviously, we're going to use the best tool for the job available, right?
CSV files.
Maybe not.
So typically, people use Parquet files for this.
Obviously, both Spark and DuckDB can read and write Parquet files, so that works really
well.
But we've all heard about the issues that have appeared with updates and schema evolution,
these kind of things, which is why we have Lakehouse formats.
So today, we are announcing official DuckDB support for Delta Lake.
It's going to be available completely out of the box with zero configuration or anything
like that.
But we have done a bunch of these integrations.
And one thing that's really special about the Delta Lake integration is that we use
this Delta kernel that Databricks is building with the community.
And that's really exciting because it means that we don't have to build this from scratch
like we used to, for example, with the Parquet reader, but we can actually delegate a lot
of the hard work of reading Delta files to the Delta kernel while at the same time keeping
our operators within the engine and so on and so forth.
So it's really exciting.
We also made an extension for DuckDB that can talk to the Unity catalog.
So with this extension, we can find the Delta Lake tables in the catalog and then actually
interact with them from DuckDB itself.
So here we can see a script that actually works if you install DuckDB now.
You can install this Unity catalog extension.
You can create your secret, which is like credentials.
And then you can basically just read these tables as if they were local tables.
If you want to hear more about this, there's actually going to be a talk this afternoon
at 1.40.
Just look for DuckDB in the title.
So the Delta extension joins this growing list of DuckDB extensions.
For example, there's others for Iceberg, Vector Search, Spatial, and this sort of thing.
But as an open source project and a small team, we're really excited about Tabular and
Databricks bringing Delta Lake and Iceberg closer together because for us, it means we
don't have to maintain two different things for the same, essentially, problem.
And we're really excited about that.
It means less work for us, and I think everyone wins.
I just want to plug one sort of small thing that we're actually launching today.
I've mentioned extensions to DuckDB.
We've seen a lot of uptake in DuckDB extensions.
And from now on, actually, we are launching community extensions, which means that everyone
can make DuckDB extensions and basically publish them and then installing them is as easy as
just typing install into a DuckDB near you.
So that's all for today.
Thank you very much.
And I will give back to Sjoerd.
That integration is super awesome.
It's very exciting.
So how do we top that?
By not going back.
By going forward.
And forward to Delta 4.0.
So we have the branch cut.
It's available.
Delta 4.0 is the biggest change in Delta since history.
It's jam-packed with new features and functionality.
Things like coordinated commits, collations, all sorts of new functionality that make it
easier to work with, various different types of data sets.
We won't have time to go through all of this, so I'm going to pick a couple and dive into
why these are such amazing features.
So Liquid Clustering is generally available now as part of Delta 4.0.
And with Liquid Clustering, we really wanted to set out to solve this challenge that so
many people have brought up.
Partitioning, it's good for performance, but it's so complicated.
You get over-partitioning, small files, you pick the wrong thing.
It's a pain to resolve.
And Liquid solves this with a novel data layout strategy that's so easy to use that we hope
all of you will say goodbye to partitioned by.
You never need to say that again when you define a table.
Not only is it easy to use, we found out it's up to 7 times faster for writes and 12x faster
for reads.
So the performance benefits are amazing.
And of course, it's easy to evolve the schema, make changes, define anything without having
to worry about all your data being rewritten and transformed.
There are about 1,500 people, customers, actively using this.
The adoption has been insane.
Over 1.2 zettabytes of data have been skipped.
And you don't have to take my word for it.
Even Shell, when they started using it for their time series workloads, saw over an order
of magnitude improvement in performance.
And it was just so easy to use.
Next, open variant data type.
And this one's really important.
That first word, open, is really exciting.
So what happens is now in this world of AI, you have more and more semi-structured text
data, alternative data sources, all of this coming into the lake house.
And we wanted to come up with a way to make it easier for people to store and work with
these types of data in Delta.
And usually what happens is when you're stuck with semi-structured data, most of the data
engineers, they sort of have to make a compromise.
None of us like to make compromises.
But usually, it's about being open, flexible, or fast.
And often, they'd only be able to pick two out of these three.
So for example, for semi-structured data, one approach is just store everything
as a string.
That's open.
It gives you tons of flexibility.
But parsing strings is slow.
Why would you store a number as a string and have to reread it every time?
So of course, there's an option to pick the fields out of your semi-structured data,
make them concrete types, and you get amazing performance.
This is open, very fast to access.
However, if you have sparse data, you sort of
lose out on a lot of that flexibility to modify the schema.
And relational databases for a while have had special enum or variant data types.
But all of those had always been proprietary.
If you wanted to use them to get a balance of not having to store everything
as a string and not having to shard out every single column, you got locked in.
So that's why we're very excited with variants
to be able to get that sweet spot in the middle.
You can have your JSON data, store it with flexibility,
fully open with amazing performance.
It's very easy to use.
It works with even complex JSON.
Here's an example of the syntax.
And we found, of course, it's eight times faster than storing your JSON data
as raw strings.
This is just tremendous.
So if you're storing JSON in a string field today,
go back to work or home and start using Variant.
It's available in DBR 15.3.
But most importantly, all of the code for Variant
is already checked in to Apache Spark.
There's a common subdirectory in the 4.0 branch
right now that has all of the implementation
details for Variant and all of the operators.
And there is a binary format code definition and library
that we've made available open source so all the other data
engines can also use Variant.
We really want this to be an official open format
that everyone adopts so that, finally, we
have a non-proprietary way of storing semi-structured data
reliably.
And so with that, yeah, it's a big deal.
With that, I just want to summarize Delta Lake 4.0.
It's interoperable.
We have this amazing ecosystem of people like Hannes working together,
making it better and stronger.
We get amazing performance benefits.
And all of this is just so much easier to use now
than it ever was before.
OK.
Thank you.
Thanks.
You.
Awesome.
All right.
OK, so back to the state of intelligence platform side,
so that was awesome.
We heard about Delta Uniform.
We heard from Ryan Blue.
Cool that DuckDB now will support writing natively
into Delta and Uniform and UC.
Super cool.
OK.
And then we have Delta 4.0, so that's awesome.
All right.
So next, creator of, or original creator of Apache Spark
project, Matej Zahari, is going to tell us about Unity Catalog.
OK, so we have a lot of announcements here.
And this is a long talk, so it's going
to be super, super exciting to see.
So let's welcome Matej.
And also, pay attention to his t-shirt and his shoes
carefully, OK?
Welcome Matej to stage.
Matej.
Hi, everyone.
Thanks, Ali.
Yes, I have the new Unity Catalog t-shirt.
Yep.
You'll be able to get one soon, I think, somewhere, so.
All right.
So I have a somewhat longer session for you today,
because I'm talking about governance
with open source Unity Catalog, as well as data sharing.
If you're familiar, we have another open source project.
We launched delta sharing.
That's really making waves in the open data collaboration
space, and we have a lot of exciting announcements
around that.
So I'll start by talking about what's new in Unity Catalog
and what it means to open source it, why we did it,
what's in there.
And then, so Ali announced that we're
open sourcing it yesterday, but he
let me keep one more thing to announce today
that I'll talk about.
That's the next big direction for Unity Catalog.
And then, finally, I'll switch gears
to sharing and collaboration, and we'll
have some cool demos of all these things, too.
So let's start with Unity Catalog.
So I think everyone who works in data and AI
knows that governance, whether it's for security or quality
or compliance, remains a huge challenge
for many applications.
And it's getting even harder with generative AI.
There are new regulations being written all the time about it.
I heard in California alone, there
are 80 bills proposed that regulate AI in some form.
And also, you need to really understand
where your data is coming from if you're
going to create models and deploy them
and run these applications.
So we hear things from our customers
all the time about how they would love to use AI,
but they can't really govern it with their existing frameworks.
And even on the data space, it's complex enough.
Even there, all the rules are changing,
and people are really worried about how to best do it.
So we wanted to step back and think, it's 2024.
If you had to design an ideal governance
solution from scratch today, what would you want it to have?
We asked a bunch of CIOs.
And we thought you really wanted to have three things.
The first thing is what we call open connectivity.
So you should be able to take any data, any source that's
in your organization, and plug it into the governance
solution, because no one's going to migrate everything
into just one data system over time.
Most organizations have hundreds or thousands of these.
So you really want a governance solution
that can really cover all this data wherever
it lives, in any format, even in other platforms.
Then we also really think you need unified governance
across data and AI.
I think it's clearer than ever with generative AI
that you have to manage these together.
You can't be managing AI without knowing what data went into it.
And also, all the output of AI, as you do serving,
is going to be data about how your application is doing.
It's got the same problems of quality and security.
So we really need it to be unified.
And then finally, we heard everyone
asking for open access from any compute engine or client,
because there are so many great solutions out there.
They'll keep coming out.
They'll be the next data processing engine,
the next machine learning library.
You want it to work with your data.
So this is what we're building with Unity Catalog,
especially with the open source launch today.
So first of all, open connectivity.
Unity Catalog and Databricks as a platform
uniquely lets you connect data in other systems
as well and process it together in a very efficient way
through this feature we call Lakehouse Federation.
So you can really connect all your data
and give users a single place where you set security
policies, you manage quality, and you make it available.
It also is the only governance system in the industry,
really, that's unified governance for data and AI.
So since the beginning, since we launched this three years ago,
we had support for tables, models, files.
And we're adding new concepts as they come out
in the AI world, like tools, which
we talked about yesterday with the tool catalog
concept for Gen AI agents.
And for all these things, you can
get these capabilities on top, ranging from access control
to lineage to monitoring and discovery.
And finally, one of the big things that
is possible today through the open API and open source
project we just launched is open access to all your tables
through a wide range of applications.
I'll talk more about that in a bit.
But the cool thing here is, again, it's not just data
systems like DocDB, but also a lot of the leading machine
learning ones, like LangChain, can integrate with Unity
Catalog.
brainstorms about the upcoming sensibility design.
So cloud cloud injection is a very
soon powerful set of capabilities that
high-tech phones and cell phones and
technology can integrate with.
It's been widely adopted and some of them are managing tens
of petabytes of data like GM or have thousands of active users
like Pepsi here.
It's been widely adopted and some of them are managing tens of
petabytes of data like GM or have thousands of active users
like Pepsi here.
So let me start with open connectivity.
So I'm really excited today to announce
GA of lake house federation, the ability to connect and manage
external data sources in Unity.
Thanks, everyone.
So this is a feature that we launched last year, a year ago
at summit.
It's a new feature that we launched
in the last year, it's called lake
house federation, it's going to allow you to use the same
governance rules on top and get the same experience managing
quality, tracking lineage and so on as people work on them that
you get with your Delta tables in there.
And it's been growing extremely quickly.
We now have 5,000 monthly active customers and if you look at
the graph of queries on lake house federation, it's still
growing exponentially.
So it's a really cool thing to be able to
have all of your data in one place and
have all of your stuff in one system, it's just not the case.
And actually work with it together.
And another really cool thing that we're announcing is lake
house federation for Apache Hive and Glue.
So if you've got an existing Hive meta store or Glue, you've
got lots of tables in there, you can now connect that
efficiently to Unity catalog and manage the data in that as well.
So it's a really cool thing to be able to do.
And we're really excited about it.
And we're also excited about the fact that we're going to be
launching new Databricks as a data platform.
So what about unified governance across data and AI? There's so
much happening in this space and our team has been working hard
to launch a whole range of new features here.
So I won't even have time to go through all of them, but just in
the past year, we've got everything from AI-assisted
monitoring, which is a really cool thing to be able to do.
And we're really excited about that.
And we're also excited about two
announcements here around ABAC and lake house monitoring.
So first, lake house monitoring is going GA.
So lake house monitoring is the ability to take any table or
machine learning model in Unity catalog and automatically check
for quality on it.
So it's a really cool thing to be able to do.
And we're excited about that.
And the other thing about this, since it's integrated into the
data platform, we know exactly when the data changes or when,
you know, the model is called. So it's very efficient and it
does all this computation incrementally.
And it gives you these rich dashboards about quality, you
know, classification of the data discovered and so on, plus all
these reports go into these tables.
So it's a really cool thing to be able to do.
And we're excited about that.
And we're also excited about the fact that we're going to be
launching a new
state there, so that's going GA today.
And sorry, I should say that's been
already in use at thousands of customers.
And then the second thing that we're launching a preview of
soon is attribute-based access control.
So we've developed this policy builder and tagging system where
we've separated all of these metadata
into unique headers and tags by style and
by
results, with these different patterns of data we discover.
And you can then propagate, you know, these masking policies
across all of them. And this works easily through
the UI or through SQL. So these are just two of the
things.
And then, you know, the third thing is, you know,
you can use open sourcing for a lot of different things.
You can use open sourcing for a lot of different things.
So a lot of people asked me yesterday, why are you open
sourcing Unity Catalog?
And really it's because, you know, customers need it.
Customers are looking to design their data platform architecture
for the next few decades. And they want to build on an open
foundation. And today, even though you see a lot of cloud
data platforms that claim, you know, support for openness in
the data, they're not really open sourcing.
They're not really open sourcing.
And they're not really open sourcing.
So there are a lot of cloud data warehouses out there, for
example, that could read tables, say, in Delta Lake or
Iceberg, but most of them also have their native tables that
are more efficient, more optimized, and they really nudge
you to use those and to have your data locked in.
And then there are other platforms, even some of the Lake
platforms where, you know, it seems like everything is in an
open format, but it's not.
It's a lot of data.
And so we want an open Lake house where they own the data,
no vendor owns the data, without lock-in, and where they can use
any compute engine in the future.
So we've, you know, we've been big fans of this approach for a
while. We think it's where the world is going.
So that's why we design everything we do to support it.
And already today in Databricks, you know, all your data is in an
open format. There's no concept of a native table.
You can have a table, and you can have a database, and you can
have a database, and you can have a database.
And so we're really excited to see the
ecosystem of clients that only understand Apache, Iceberg, or
Hudi can still read your tables.
And the next logical step is to also provide open source
catalog.
So this is what we have in the first release of Unity catalog.
We'll be, you know, gradually releasing the things that we
built in our platform, and, you know, removing all the
libraries that we no longer use, at any point in the space.
We hope to start this
scenario in the next few months and
then prompting every project ready and
AI, and we really are excited.
We proposed the project to the Linux foundation, and it's been
accepted this morning. So it'll be there. Yeah, thanks.
And then another cornerstone of Unity catalog is we're doubling
down
the number of libraries that we use, and we're
really excited about that, and we're
really excited about this format, so you can connect to it
from any engine that understands that, and we hope that means
that a lot of the ecosystem out there will work with it.
All right, so you might be asking, you know, is this for
real? When are you actually releasing it? Maybe in 90 days?
Maybe 89 days? Because Ali announced it yesterday.
So, yeah, we're working on it.
We're working on it.
Yeah, so this is Unity catalog on GitHub.
You know, looks solid to me. People are working hard on it.
So just going to go into the settings here.
Scroll down to the danger zone. And make this thing public.
Yep, I want to make it public. I understand.
All right, and I think it's public now.
So, yeah, take a look.
So, GitHub.com, Unity catalog.
Thanks, everyone. Yeah, so that wasn't that hard.
And, of course, we invite all of you to contribute.
We'll be working hard to expand the project, and we want to do
it all in the open. We're not going to keep it closed for a
while to build this stuff up. All right, so, yeah, it's
now available. My slide is right.
So we just released version 0.1.
This version supports tables, volumes for unstructured data,
and AI tools and functions.
So it implements that tool catalog concept we talked about
yesterday, has the Iceberg support, and if you look at our
website, it has open-source server, APIs, and clients, and
these work just as well with your instance of Unity catalog
on Databricks. So everything built there, you
know.
You can just connect to your current data.
We're also really excited to have a great array of launch
partners, everywhere from the, you know, the cloud vendors,
some of which have been contributing a lot to open
standards like the Iceberg REST API already, to leading
companies in AI and in governance.
So Microsoft, AWS, Google, they're all excited to see this
happening, and we hope to see more of them in the future.
And, of course, there's a lot more coming.
We're working on bringing a lot of the nice things you have in
Databricks on Unity out here, including
delta-sharing, models, ML-flow, and
a lot of other things that we're working on.
So, you know, we're working on a lot of
things, and we're working on a lot of
things, and we invite you again to collaborate with us.
So that's kind of an overview of Unity catalog, some of our
launches in there.
It's great to hear about them, but even better to see a demo,
and for that, I'd like to invite Zeeshan Papa, one of our product
managers, to show you all of these new features.
Here they are, on the right-hand side.
It has a really simple presentation
Thanks Mate, I'm glad to be here.
This offer offers a unified interface
awesome, applying access controls and querying
In some cases, only some of your data will reside in the Lakehouse.
To address this, we've simplified and secured access control
to systems such as BigQuery,
catalogs such as Glue and Hive,
MySQL, Postgres,
Redshift, Snowflake,
and Azure SQL.
All of this is powered by Lakehouse Federation.
Switching over here on the left-hand side to a SQL Editor
I'll show you how to query an external data system
by running some SQL
that will join a store report table
that is federated from Snowflake
along with a Lakehouse native source
that contains data on retail store returns.
Once this table is created,
this store report table will become a Unity Catalog
managed object, which means
the platform now handles all of your table management challenges
including automatic data layout,
automatic performance,
and predictive optimizations for you.
But managed
doesn't mean locked in.
This table, or any Unity Catalog object
is accessible outside of Databricks
via Unity Catalog's
open API. Let me show you
how easy it is to query this newly created object
using DuckDB. First,
I will opt this table in for external access
as I've done for other tables in this catalog.
Next, I'll switch
over to DuckDB
which is the same nightly bill that you can access right now.
I'll attach this catalog,
AccountingProd, to DuckDB
and now I'll run a quick query
to see all of the tables in this catalog.
And as you can see,
that store report table that I just created
is right there.
Next, I'll run a quick query
to select from this table.
I can do the same tables
created in Unity Catalog and quickly query them
using DuckDB's native Delta Reader.
This is Databricks' commitment to open source
and open interoperability here and now.
Applause
So far, I've walked through
Unity Catalog's Explorer,
Lakehouse Federation, and our new open API.
However, a major challenge for
many organizations is ensuring consistent
and scalable policy enforcement
across a diverse range of data and AI assets.
Let me show you how easy it is to scale your
governance using tags and ABAC policies
combined with proactive PII monitoring.
Let's switch over here to the
OnlineSalesProd catalog and
let's take a look at this table
called WebLogs. One of the features
that's been enabled in Unity Catalog is
Lakehouse Monitoring, which allows for simplified
and proactive PII detection of anomalies
in your data and models.
Within this dashboard over here on the left-hand side,
you can explore columns and rows
and you can see that PII has been
detected in the user input column.
Now, this is obviously a problem.
Before this dataset can be actually
used, this data must be masked
and appropriate policies must be applied.
Let's switch back to the Catalog Explorer.
Back in this Explorer,
over here in the Rules tab, a new rule
can be created to express policy across all
data. It's now so much easier
to mask all email columns across all
tables with a single rule. Let's give this rule
a name. Let's call it Mask Email.
Alright.
And we're going to give it a quick description.
Let's mask some emails.
And we want to
apply this to all account users.
Alright.
And this is a rule type of Column Mask.
And we're going to
select a Column Mask function that I
previously created, conveniently called Mask Email.
And we want to
match on a condition when a column
is detected that has a tag
with a tag value of PII
email. Alright. Let's go ahead and
create that rule.
And that's it. And now to validate this mask,
we're going to go back to the Weblog Sales
table and we can observe
here in this table in the Sample Data
the User Input column over here
to the right that the data has now been
masked.
Since this applies to the entire
Catalog, let's go to a different table.
Somewhere in here.
There we go.
As you can see, we've got an Email Address
column in here as well, tagged PII
email. Let's go up to Sample Data.
As you can see over here as well, this
table has also been masked with one
rule.
So Matei, I've shown how
Unity Catalog enables organizations to have
open access to their data seamlessly
no matter where it resides while applying
unified governance to ensure its integrity
and security. Thank you.
Thanks.
Thanks so much, Zeeshan.
All right. So
that's Unity Catalog in action.
So as I said,
Ali let me keep one thing to announce today
which I'm really excited
about. So what we just saw
is you could set up a Catalog,
it's open, it's got access control,
monitoring, you can get to it
from any engine, you can federate stuff
into it. Are you done?
As an engineer, you might say this is pretty good.
What will happen, unfortunately, is
someone will come in and ask
a business question. For example,
how is my ARR trending
in EMEA? And to answer this
kind of question, there's not enough
information in just the Catalog,
in just the table schemas and things like that.
So you have to understand things
like how is ARR defined?
That's some kind of unique calculation
for your business.
Maybe there are many tables that mention ARR.
Which one actually is the right
one to use to get this information?
How is EMEA defined? Which countries
are really part of it? And so on.
And so the question is, how do you
bridge this gap? So this is
something that is typically done
in some kind of metrics layer
and we're really excited to announce
that we're adding first class support
for metrics as a concept
in Unity Catalog.
So, yeah.
Applause
Yeah, thanks.
So this is something
we'll be
rolling out
later this year.
So Unity Catalog
metrics. So the
idea here is that you can define metrics
inside Unity Catalog
and manage them together with all
the other assets. So you can set
governance rules on them, you can find them
in search, you can get audit events,
you can get lineage for them
and so on. And like the
other parts of Unity, we're taking
an open approach to this. We want
you to be able to use the metrics in
any downstream tool.
So we're going to expose them to multiple
BI tools. So you can pick the BI
tool of your choice. We'll of course
integrate them with AIBI.
One of the things we're excited about is we're designing
metrics from the beginning to be AI
friendly so that AIBI
and similar tools can really
understand how to use these
and give you great results.
And you'll be able to just use them
through SQL, through
table functions that you can compute on.
And we are also partnering
with DBT, Kube, and AtSkill
as external metrics provider
to make it easy to bring in
and govern and manage metrics from those
inside Unity. So
with all of this stuff in action, I'd like
to invite Zeeshan to the stage again for
a quick demo of metrics.
♪
Thanks, Matei.
As you mentioned, metrics enhance
business users' ability to ask questions,
understand their organization's data,
and ultimately make better decisions.
Rather than sifting through all of the
data, certified business metrics can be
governed, discovered, and queried
efficiently through Unity Catalog.
Having already discussed
the Catalog Explorer, let's dive
into business metrics.
In this overview tab here, you'll see a list
of all available sales metrics.
A few of these metrics are marked
certified. This
indicates a higher level of
trustworthiness.
We're going to select the Web Revenue
metric down below here.
As you can see, it's also marked certified.
By clicking into this,
you can see the metadata that's associated
with this metric and the predefined dimensions
that are associated with Web Revenue.
These are used when querying the metrics
such as date or location. This is like having
a built-in instruction manual for your data.
On the right-hand side here,
you can see the metric overview section.
This is where you can see the
description of the metric, who edited it, and who certified
it. You can also see information
about where the metric came from and where the
metric is used, such as notebooks, dashboards,
and genie spaces. Let's click into
this dashboard.
As you can see in this dashboard over
here on the right-hand side in the x-axis
column, I have all of the
interesting information such as
the dimensions and
country, city, state, etc.
This allows you to slice and dice without
needing to fully understand the data model.
Let's go into a notebook
as well. This metric isn't just
usable in a dashboard. It's also queryable
from external tools and notebooks. In this
notebook, we're using the get metric function
to pull all aggregated data.
It's that simple.
Finally, let's go
back into a genie space.
Here, Web Revenue metrics can be used
to answer natural language questions.
In this space, you'll also see that this
visualization was created by asking
about the revenue generated across states
using this metric. This approach
extends the reach of these metrics throughout the organization,
making them accessible to business users.
As you can see, Matej,
Unity Catalog metrics make it easy
for any user to discover and use
trusted data to make better decisions.
Thanks, Yixuan. Super excited about this.
So,
after doing two demos
this morning, I think Yixuan can have the
rest of the day off.
Very nice to see those.
All right. So, the
final portion of the talk I want to talk about,
I want to talk about what we're doing
in sharing and cross-org collaboration.
Depending
what industry you're in, you've probably
seen that data sharing and
collaboration between companies,
between organizations, is
becoming a really important part of the
modern data space. It can help
providers and suppliers
coordinate better. It can help
streamline a lot of
business processes. Just yesterday, I met a
customer who thought that they could
speed up, basically, launching
new drugs by a factor of two
by implementing these
kind of technologies.
So, really powerful
way for many industries
to move forward. And we started
looking at this area about three
years ago. We wanted to provide great support
for it. And we started by talking
to a lot of data providers who collaborate.
And what they told us
was that many of
the data platforms out there
support some kind of sharing between different
instances, but it's always closed.
You can only share within that same
data platform, within that
customers of that data warehouse or whatever.
And as a provider, or as any
company that wants to collaborate with a lot of
partners, this is very restrictive.
So, Empirity, for example, who's
a CDP,
said that they would prefer to invest
in open solutions that
let them set up data
collaboration once and then
be able to reach anyone, regardless of what
platform they're computing on.
So, that's the approach that we've taken
with all our sharing and collaboration
infrastructure by
creating an open collaboration ecosystem
based on open standards.
And the core of that is delta
sharing, a feature of
Delta Lake that allows you to securely
share tables
across clouds and across data platforms.
And then we've built on that with Databricks
Marketplace and Databricks Clean Homes.
So, if you're not familiar with
delta sharing, basically
this is a core part of the
Delta Lake project, where if you
have a table and
increasingly other kinds of assets as well,
you can run this server
that has an open protocol
and serve out just parts of your table
to other parties that are
authorized to access them.
And because the protocol is open,
it's a very simple one based on
Parquet files
that they're given access to,
it's really easy to implement
a lot of consumers. So, of course, you can
use Databricks to access these, but you can also
just use Pandas, Apache Spark,
even BI products like
Tableau and Power BI
are letting you load data right into
there. And it makes a lot of sense.
If you're a data provider, you want to publish
something, why should the other party
even need to install a data
warehouse in the first place? Why not deliver that
data, say, straight to Tableau or straight to
Excel or something like that?
40% of those recipients are not on Databricks. So this idea of cross-platform collaboration
is real and our customers are able to deliver data and to have real-time data exchange with
anyone regardless of what data platform they're using.
So super excited about the growth of that this year.
Day 3
.
We are continuing to expand Delta sharing
and one exciting announcement is we're hooking together two of
the best features
of the platform, Lakehouse federation and sharing to let
you share data automatically from other data sources as well.
So we talk to a lot of companies who have some data in a data
warehouse and they have some data in a data warehouse and
they want to share it to the other end of the platform, they
want to share it to the other end of the platform, but they
want to collaborate. And since we built this federation
technology that can efficiently query this data, push down
filters, get it out and deliver it, we are just connecting that
to Delta sharing to let you seamlessly do this. So now you
can really share data from, you know, any data warehouse, any
database with any app that understands the Delta sharing
capability that we provide and you can do that from the
own end. Thank you very much, this is really exciting to say
thank you for you being the White papers for this.
So one of the things that builds on Delta sharing is data
marketplace.
This is something we launched about two years ago.
And it's also been going extremely
well and we are very excited about it.
We are the first data marketplaces anywhere in the
cloud on any platform.
So it's continuing to go.
Our team has been adding a whole bunch of new functionality
there that providers are asking for like private exchanges,
sharing of non-data assets like models and volumes, usage
analytics and even support for non-database clients.
If you put data in there, you can reach these other platforms
and it's a lot of fun.
So we are very excited about that.
And we are also very excited to
welcome 12 new partners to this, to the sharing and marketplace
ecosystems. Some of these announcements went out last
week, but anywhere from Axiom, Amperity, Atlassian, industry
leaders in many different domains are now connecting to
this ecosystems and making data available to users on Databricks
and we are very excited to see how this will continue to go.
And we are also very excited to see
how this will continue to grow in the ecosystem of partners.
So thanks to all of them who are participating in this.
Great.
So, yeah, really excited to see how this will continue to go in
the future.
The final thing I want to talk about is
that we are soon launching public preview of Databricks
cleanrooms.
So what is a cleanroom?
It's a place where you can have a
database, a database of some tables, some code, some
unstructured data, some AI models, any kind of asset you
can have on the Databricks platform and you can agree on a
computation with someone else that you run and then send the
results to just one recipient. So, for example, it could be as
simple as you each have some tables and you want to figure
out, you know, how many records you both have in common and it
can be as complicated as, you know, someone has a machine
learning model and you have a Databricks model and you want to
get the predictions or get the differences between the two
models.
So two things really distinguish Databricks cleanrooms from
other cleanroom solutions out there.
The first is because you have this complete data and AI
platform, you can really run any computation.
It can be machine learning, SQL, Python, R
and so on versus just SQL in many other cleanroom solutions.
And the second is because you have a
cleanroom solution, you can do cross-cloud and even cross-platform
collaboration.
If someone's primary data store is not
Databricks, they can still seamlessly connect it to the
cleanroom and do work on that.
So this is going to go into public preview just a little bit
later this summer.
And we've already seen some really awesome use cases.
One company we've been working closely with is MasterCard, who
is a private company that does a lot of
data-driven work for cleanrooms.
And they have a range of different partners.
You can imagine the different kinds of things that they can do
with their data.
And who is, you know, looking for the best way to do private
versions of the state-of-the-art algorithms and techniques to
work with this data.
So I want to show you all this collaboration work in action.
And for that, we have our third demo.
So let's go ahead and take a look at what we're doing.
Thanks, Mate. Picture this.
I'm part of a media team at a large retailer.
We are teaming up with a supplier to run a joint
advertisement campaign to grow our sales.
And we're working with a retailer to
joint advertisement campaign to grow our sales.
And to do that, we need to collaborate on joint customer
data.
I, as a retailer, have data on my customers and their shopping
behavior.
My supplier has their customer loyalty data.
However, we have some challenges.
First, we cannot share any sensitive information about our
customers.
We cannot share any sensitive information about our customers.
And finally, we want to leverage machine learning and Python for
our analysis and not just SQL.
Databricks clean rooms can help with all of this in a privacy
safe environment. Let's see how.
So, I'm a retailer. I'm a retailer.
I'm a retailer.
I have a market in the East US as my cloud and region.
And what's amazing is that it doesn't matter that my supplier
and I are on different regions and clouds.
I then go ahead and specify my supplier as a collaborator.
And once the clean room is created, I bring in the data.
And I can use the data to help me with my audience segmentation
task.
So, I'm a retailer. I'm a retailer.
I have a market in the East US as my cloud and region.
And what's amazing is that it doesn't matter that my supplier
and I are on different regions and clouds.
I then go ahead and specify my supplier as a collaborator.
And once the clean room is created, I bring in the data.
And what's amazing is that it doesn't matter that my supplier
and I are on different regions and clouds.
Now, my clean room is ready for my supplier to come join.
So, let me flip hats. I'm now the supplier, hence dark
mode. And I join the clean room that
my retail counterpart added me to.
Now, I can bring in the data associated with the table,
but not the actual data.
This is perfect context for good collaboration,
while ensuring that I'm not privy to any sensitive information.
Now it's my turn to bring in my customer data,
but my customer data is on a snowflake warehouse
outside Databricks.
And I don't want to create a custom ETL pipeline
to bring this data in.
And I don't have to, because lucky for me,
I can directly specify
Lakehouse federated tables
as sources to this clean room.
With no copy, no ETL,
these clean rooms truly scale
for cross-platform collaboration.
And now, my favorite part.
I inspect the notebook.
The code looks good.
And I run it.
So the job run has successfully started.
And in a few seconds, it's done.
And I'm presented with
delightful visual results
to help me understand
that we can target 1.2 million
households for our campaign
based on factors such as
customer age, income bracket,
and household size.
Thank you.
So let's go back to our slides
to summarize what we just saw.
Our retailer and supplier
were able to bring their respective
customer data to a privacy-safe
environment, the clean room, and
collaborate without sharing any
sensitive information with each other.
It didn't matter that they were in different
clouds, regions, or data
platforms. They could
collaborate on more than just structured data,
and they were able to use Python
for machine learning.
Thank you all so much.
And back to you, Matej.
Awesome demo.
So super excited about
clean rooms, and especially
cross-platform clean rooms. I think it's really
going to transform a lot of industries.
It just makes sense to be able to collaborate
on data and AI
in real time in a secure fashion.
So I think, overall, I've
given you a good sense of our approach.
We really believe that picking
the right governance and
sharing foundation for your
company is essential for the future, and we
think it needs to be an open
and cross-platform approach.
We've been thrilled to see both Unity Catalog
and Delta Sharing go from just
an idea to being
used by virtually all our
customers in a few years, and
we're excited that both of these are open.
We're excited about the partners,
and we invite you to join the
open ecosystem.
That was a lot of tech in this
keynote, but the exciting thing is what you
can do with the tech.
For that, I'm super
thrilled to invite
our next speaker,
an actual sports star for the first
time on the Data and AI Summit stage,
Alexander Booth from
the Texas Rangers.
The Texas Rangers are one win away
from their first world championship.
Texas takes the lead.
It's head-to-head.
The Texas Rangers
win the World Series.
Champions in
2023.
That was a huge
moment for us as a baseball organization.
Moving from the bottom of the league
to winning our first ever World Series.
All credit must go to
the players and coaches that made this
happen. This was also a huge moment
for our community as over 500,000
people attended our
World Series parade, and for me,
growing up a lifelong Rangers fan, it was a dream
come true. However, this
was also a win for the data
team that I lead at the Rangers, and
I'm here today to talk to you about
how we use data intelligence to drive
competitive advantage and transform
how the modern game is played.
Most of you
may know this, but baseball has
always been a data-driven sport.
Whether it's comparing statistics
on the back of baseball cards to the
modern age of Moneyball. However,
how data is used in decision
making has changed dramatically
in this modern age of AI.
Data used to be
descriptive, evaluating
past performance.
Now, data is
predictive, optimizing our
understanding of future player
performance.
One example of this
is how we're using data and AI
for biometric insights.
We build predictive
models on how the body's motion
affects how a ball is thrown,
leading to designed pitches
guided by AI that are personalized
for each unique pitcher.
Further, with a better
understanding of how players move
when swinging the bat, we can provide
biomedical recommendations to optimize
for specific types of hits.
With these insights, we can advise
our players. You're trying to hit for power?
Get those legs and try to
get it out of the ballpark.
If you want to just hit for contact, just square up the ball.
In Little League, my coach would always
tell me to choke up on the bat and bend your
knees. We now measure
that at high frame rate,
300 frames a second.
This pose tracking gives us further
insight into injuries and
workload management, too.
Data and AI helped make the most of our
players' athletic talents, leading to those
incredible clutch hits that maybe you
all saw during the World Series.
Pose tracking isn't our
only new data source. We
also track every player's position
continuously at 30 frames
a second for every Major League game.
This gives us unprecedented
ways of measuring defensive
capabilities. By understanding
tendencies, reaction
times, and the way that our fielders
move when trying to catch that fly ball,
we can optimize our defensive
placement using AI to maximize
the likelihood of a player making
that out. And yeah, maybe we got a little
bit too good at that, and Major League Baseball
changed the rules a couple years ago, but
we still use it to this day.
This culminated in a playoff run
where we went 11-0
on the road, highlighted by
impressive defensive plays such as
home run robbing catches and clutch
double plays.
How did we change this
data and AI game?
It wasn't always like this.
Getting to this point where we could realize
these successes was not easy.
There were so many challenges
that we faced just a few years ago
when we began our data modernization
journey. Stop me
if any of this sounds familiar.
Our on-prem stack could not scale
to these new data sources.
Those rising IT costs and the maintenance
of these on-prem servers led to
an untenable ROI on AI
investments. Further,
as our data team grew, supporting
minor league operations all around
the country, as well as scouting
initiatives all around the world,
those governance and permissions
became difficult to manage.
We lacked governance and ran
into fragmented silos.
Our data teams were split between
minor league player development,
amateur analytics, international
and advanced scouting teams.
These slow and disjointed
processing within silos led
to delays of reports that
our players and coaches needed.
In some cases, we weren't delivering
reports until the next day,
well after the game had already finished.
And while we don't have
a live link to the dugout,
perhaps caused by a certain
trashcan banging incident a few years ago,
it is still imperative that our
players receive that information post-game
to prepare themselves
for what happened and how to be successful
tomorrow. With 162
games, baseball is a
marathon, and quick feedback is
a necessity for our players.
To solve these
problems, we have unified and simplified
our data and AI stack on the
lakehouse with Databricks.
Unity Catalog unites
our data silos under one roof.
We have a variety of data
with sensitive information,
such as player addresses,
financial contract information.
Further, biomechanical
and medical records should
not be widely accessible through the
org. Unity Catalog
allows us to have that single shared platform
with appropriate permissions in
place to comply with both
internal and external regulations
such as FERPA and HIPAA.
Unity Catalog also
gives us the ability to manage
clusters, ETL pipelines,
all within the JSON
metadata. Once our data is
loaded, the data intelligence platform
is also able to comment and
provide AI summaries around what
that data actually is.
This democratizes use for our analysts
who sometimes struggle to figure out where the
correct data source lies.
Finally, we've also built hundreds
of ML and AI models
on this data. The
ML registry governed by Unity
Catalog gives us a great platform to
organize and search those models.
However, Unity Catalog also
allows us to govern who and which
data teams can access models
and features from the feature store for
their own projects.
Data lineage of all of this
gives us a great insight to see how the data
flows from source to modeling
to those final BI reports
that our players need.
Transparency builds trust.
And of course, data sharing
allows us to connect with other data verticals
and vendors inside of our department.
This includes ballpark, it includes
concessions, as well as sharing
live data within how the fans are
engaging with the team.
Everything with the appropriate permissions in place.
The net result?
We now have four times
more data ingested and used for
AI at the same cost as our legacy
systems. We have hundreds of
users scattered around the country and the
globe with secure and governed
access to these data and
ML KPIs.
We also have ten times faster
data insights after games and
workouts, getting the reports into
the hands of our players quickly
that they need to be the best that they can be.
And of course, all of this contributed
to our first ever World Series
win. I tried to have a spotlight
on my ring for the whole time, but
it's all, they just said no to that.
But Databricks is
really helping our organization win by
empowering our team with data intelligence.
However, we're just getting
started here. With the rise
of generative AI, we have invested
time and effort to find innovation
in this new space. I actually
have a quick demo where I will be using
the Databricks AI BI Genie
to provide a natural language interface
into our data. With the
trade deadline coming up, as well as being
in San Francisco, I thought it would be fun
to see if there are any players on the San
Francisco Giants that might have future
trade value.
In this application, we are using
public data from Baseball Savants.
Notice that these tables, as well
as the application, are both governed
throughout Unity Catalog.
Users need to have the correct permissions to access
both. Comments, as well
as summaries, describe and help
teach the Genie application
what exactly these internal KPIs
that mean something to me, but maybe not
to you, what those actually are.
And of course, all of this needs to be shared
and governed within the workspace.
Analysts can ask broad
questions of this data.
You're going to see here that we're going to be
looking for just who on the Giants
has any trade value.
I know, I type super slow, I guess.
They're like, do you want to do this on the computer? And I'm like, yeah, it's fine.
You can pretend
that I'm typing that out. The Genie
doesn't know how to answer this question
of what is trade value. It just brings
back statistics about players on the Giants.
So what we can do now is instruct
the Genie what I care about with trade
value. I want to look at the difference
between expected and observed performance
to look for undervalued
players.
Notice that we quickly see that
the Genie application is able to see that Luis
Matos, as well as Matt Chapman, both
have had significant underperformance
this season on the Giants, but maybe
we'll have better performance for the rest of the
season if they call Luis Matos
ever back up from AAA. But that's a side
note. Anyway, we can save this as a thumbs
up as well as provide instructions
and save it as an instruction to save
it off as for an
easy access later on. And
we can also visualize this data for
quick consumption. Since we
saved this as an instruction, it's trivial
now to do the same analysis for other
baseball clubs. Here I'm asking it
do the same analysis for the
Chicago White Sox.
After some time thinking,
that's my double fast forward click,
there it goes, we see that
Martin Maldonado as well as Andrew Benatendi
have been underperforming for the Chicago
White Sox. What this
has allowed us to do is
democratize and allow
our analysts, SQL
developers, and less technical stakeholders
unprecedented access
to our raw data in
our database. This allows them to
ask the questions they need and
create an efficient starting point
for targeted and further decision
making leading into the trade deadline.
Thank you so much to the Datasperks
team that supports us. Michelle,
Hussein, Chris that onboarded us up here.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you all
this morning. Finally, we're always
looking to continue pushing the boundaries of data
and AI in sport. If interested, please
reach out. Baseball is a team sport
after all. And I will say we do a lot of our hiring
in LinkedIn, so best of luck if you use
that QR code, but you can always
find me on LinkedIn and happy to kind of talk
about this further. Thanks so much to everybody.
Wow, that's so cool.
Did you guys see the ring that he was wearing?
It was like gigantic.
That's so awesome.
I call it Moneyball 2.0.
You got to go check out their booth in the
hall. They can actually analyze your swing and
everything. They'll collect all the data and
they'll give you a score and you can
improve it, so check that out.
Okay, so I'm going to introduce
next my co-founder.
I actually said it backstage that
they said, hey, he's the number one committer
in Apache Spark, but actually we looked
and now he's actually no longer. He's number three,
but for seven years he was
the number one committer in Apache Spark project
and he's going to tell us about Spark. And one of
the cool things is this project is now
10 years plus old,
so you think, okay, we know what Spark is,
but actually it has dramatically changed
in the last just two, three years.
The project has completely been
transformed and he's going to tell us how
we did that and what are the changes and how
did the community pull off this change
that it's gone through. So let's welcome
Reynald Shin to stage.
Alright, thank you, Ali,
for that number three speech.
Good morning again.
So, as many of you know,
this conference actually started
previously named as the Spark Summit
or Spark and AI Summit, and this talk
will be going back to the roots of the
original conference, Apache Spark.
The reason why I'm here today is
because I'm going to talk about
how Spark and AI Summit
came together.
So three years ago at this conference,
we polled 100 of you
and we asked, what were the
biggest challenges you had
with Apache Spark?
Alright, so about 100 of you.
And here's what the 100 of you
told us.
By far the number one was,
hey, I have a bunch of
Scala users, they're in love with Spark,
it's great, but I also have a whole bunch
of Python users out here, as a matter of fact,
there are more of them, and
it really doesn't get Spark. Spark's kind of
clunky, it's difficult to use in Python,
it's not a great tool for them.
And the number two is
everybody else would say, hey,
I love Spark, I've been using it,
I'm using Scala also,
but dependency management
or my Spark application is a nightmare,
and version upgrades
take six months, one year, three years,
you name it.
And then there's a consensus among the language framework developers out there, not a huge
population, but very important component of the Apache Spark community, would tell us,
hey, because of that tight JVM language, so nature of Spark, it's very, very difficult
to interact with Spark outside of JVM as a framework developer, not just as an end user.
So we got to work.
And let's talk about the first one.
My name is Michael Scala, but my user's only part of Python.
If you've been to this conference in the past, you know this is not the first time we're
talking about Python.
But I found this video from about three years ago, just the other day, as I was preparing
a talk, and it's from Zach Wilson, who used to be a data engineer at Airbnb.
And here's what Zach has to say.
years ago at this conference, I think it might have still been named Spark and AI Summit
back then, and the theme of all the slides were white background instead of dark background.
We talked about the Project Zen initiative by the Apache Spark community, and it really
focused on the holistic approach to make Python a first-class citizen.
And this includes API changes, including better error messages, debuggability, performance
improvements, you name it.
Right?
It comes with almost every single aspect of the development experience.
2022, two years earlier, we gave a progress report and talked about all the different
improvements we have done in those two Spark releases.
And last year, we showed a concrete example of how much autocomplete has changed, just
out of the box, from Spark 2 all the way to Spark 3.4.
So this slide summarizes a lot of the key important features for PySpark in Spark 3
and Spark 4.
And if you look at them, it really tells you that Python is no longer just a bulldog
on the Spark, but rather a first-class language.
And there's actually many Python features that are not even available.
There are Python native, Python idiomatic, they're not available in Scala.
For example, you could define Python, you should define table functions these days,
and use that to connect to arbitrary data sources, and it's actually a much harder thing
to do in Scala.
At this conference alone this year, we had more than eight talks talking about various
features of just PySpark itself.
So a lot of work has gone into it, but how much benefit are the users seeing?
Again, this is one of those moments I can tell you nonstop about it, but it's the best,
you try it out yourself.
It's actually a completely different language.
When you look at the last 12 months alone, PySpark has been downloaded by over 200 countries
and regions in the world, just according to PyPy stats.
I was doing some number analysis the other day, I was really surprised to find this number.
Just on Databricks alone, for Spark versions 3.3 and above, so it does not include any
of the earlier Spark versions, there's a lot of them out there, but just for Spark 3.3
versions and above on Databricks, our customers have run more than 5 billion PySpark queries
every day.
To give you a sense of that scale, I think the leading cloud data warehouse runs about
5 billion queries a day on SQL.
This is actually matching that number, it's only a portion, a small portion of the overall
PySpark workloads.
But the coolest thing was, as I found the earlier video from Zach, in which he said,
hey, Scala's the native way of doing it, I found another video he published just about
three months ago.
By the way, I've never met Zach until like last week, when I reached out to him and asked,
hey, would it be okay for me to show you the video?
So let me play you this video from this year by Zach.
But things have changed in the data engineering space.
The Spark community has gotten a lot better about supporting Python, so if you are using
Spark 3, the differences between PySpark and Scala Spark and Spark 3 are, there really
isn't very much difference at all.
So thank you for the endorsement from Zach.
So if your impression of Spark was, hey, Spark is written natively in Scala, that's still
true.
We love Scala.
But if your impression is, hey, if I'm really using Python, I would get super crazy JVM
stack traces, I would get terrible error messages, the API is not very idiomatic, try it out
again.
It's very different from three years ago, right?
And of course, the job's never done.
We'll continue working on improving Python for Spark, but I think it's fairly reasonable
to declare, hey, Python is a first class language of Spark.
So I'll talk about the other two problems, version upgrades, dependency management, and
JVM language.
Now let me dive into a little bit more about why this problem exists.
So the way Spark is designed is that all the Spark application you write, your ETL
pipelines, your data science analysis tools, your notebook logic that's running, runs in
a single monolithic process called a driver that includes all the core server sides of
Spark as well.
So all the applications actually don't run on whatever clients or servers they independently
run on.
They run in the same monolithic server cluster.
And this is really sort of the essence of the problem, because one, all of this, because
they all run in the same process, the applications have to share the same dependency.
And not only do they share the same dependency as each other, they share the same dependency
as Spark itself.
Debugging is difficult, because in order to attach a debugger, you have to attach the
very process that runs all of those things.
And now, last but not least, if you want to upgrade Spark, you have to upgrade the server
and you have to upgrade every single application running on the server in one shot.
It's all nothing.
And this is a very difficult thing to do when they're all tightly coupled.
So two years ago at this very conference, Martin and I introduced to you Spark Connect.
The idea of Spark Connect is, again, very, very simple at a high level.
We wanted to take the DataFrame and SQL API of Spark that's either Python or Scala-centric
and create a language-agnostic binding for it based on gRPC and Apache Arrow.
And this sounds like a very small change, because it's just introducing a new language
binding and a new API, language-agnostic, but really it's the largest architectural
change to Spark since the introduction of DataFrame's APIs themselves.
And with this language-agnostic API, now everything else runs as clients connecting to the language-agnostic
API.
So we're breaking down that monolith into, you can think of it as microservices running
everywhere.
And how does that impact end-to-end applications?
Well, different applications now will actually run as clients connecting to the server, but
they are really clients.
They're running in their own sort of isolated environment.
And this makes upgrade super easy, because the language binding is designed to be language-agnostic
and forward and backward compatible from API perspective.
So you could actually upgrade the Spark server side, say from Spark 3.5 to Spark 4.0, without
upgrading any of the individual applications themselves.
And then you can upgrade the applications one by one as you like at your own pace.
Same thing with debuggability.
Now you can attach the debugger to that individual application that runs in a separate process
anywhere you want without impacting the server, without impacting the rest of the applications.
Now for all of the language developers out there, this language-agnostic API makes it
substantially easier to be building new languages.
Just in the last few months alone, we have seen community projects that build Go bindings,
Rust bindings, C Sharp bindings, all of this.
And it can be built entirely outside the project with their own release cadence.
So one of the most popular programming languages, probably the top two programming languages
for data science are R and Python.
Spark has built-in Python support.
There's also built-in R support called Spark R.
But actually, the most popular R programming library for Spark is not the built-in Spark
R. It's a separate project called Sparkly R.
And Sparkly R is made by this company called Posit, which is actually I was talking to
the Posit folks behind the stage, and I told them, hey, I think Posit is the coolest open
source company audience I've never heard of.
And the reason you have not heard of it is they renamed themselves fairly recently to
Posit.
But the people at Posit created the most foundational open source projects.
For example, dplyr, the very project that defined the grammar for data frames that we're
all enjoying today, ggplot, the grammar visualization, RStudio, the most popular R IDE, Wes McKinney,
who created Panda, works at Posit, and also Apache Arrow.
So I would actually like to welcome Tarif, president of Posit, onto the stage to talk
to you more about Sparkly R.
Good morning, everyone.
Thank you very much for the introduction.
It's very kind of you.
I'm very excited to be here.
And thank you, Databricks, for giving us the opportunity to speak to this audience.
We as a company are probably some people that you don't know.
You've never heard of us until he gave you a little bit of update.
But we are a public benefit corporation.
We've been around for about 15 years.
Our focus is very much about code first data science.
Our governance structure is one that allows us to think about things for a very, very
long term.
So our ambitions are actually to be around for the long haul and to continue to invest
in these open source tools.
We have been we support hundreds of R packages, and we also support the RStudio IDE.
And if you've been watching us for a while, you may have noticed that over the last five
years, we've added a lot of capabilities to the Python ecosystem, right?
So in some cases, these are multilingual solutions.
So things like Quarto, Shiny for Python, Great Tables, all of these are examples of projects
that we have, and we have more that are coming out over the coming years.
The sorry, I'm having a hard time reading this.
In 2016, we released a package called Sparkly R. And the reason we released it is because
we wanted to have an idiomatic implementation for the R users that is more aligned with
what the tidyverse is.
And for those of you who don't know what the tidyverse is, it's like a philosophy of how
you write packages and the patterns that sort of go along with that.
The original design of Spark made it so that for users in corporations in particular to
be able to use it, they would have to run RStudio and R on the servers themselves.
So you can imagine when Spark Connect became available last year, we were very, very excited
because it finally solved one of the key problems that we saw, which is like, how do you make
it so that the end user through a client does not have to get into a JVM and can just access
it directly?
And so happy to say, you know, so we started last year, and basically by the end of last
year, we had gotten support for Spark Connect to happen, Unity Catalog.
We worked with the Databricks team to figure out how to make sure that Sparkly R and the
IDE had clean support for that.
And one of the most interesting things is we added support for R user-defined functions,
which is actually a really big deal, because now the R users in your organizations can
actually participate in using Spark to solve the really hard problems, and they can collaborate
with other people in the Spark ecosystem.
So we're very excited about that, and we're interested in sort of getting people's feedback
on that if you get a chance to try it out.
So this is very anticlimactic.
For those of you who were there yesterday for the demo, you saw Casey, she's like, the
world stopped.
We decided to make life easy.
It's hard to demo some of these things.
But the change, this is the open source desktop IDE, and you can see that this is one line
change that you have to make to be able to connect to Spark Connect.
And now this user on the desktop can go ahead and access the Spark cluster and leverage
the full capabilities of that.
This is one of the key things that we think that will make a big difference in terms of
people's ability to contribute and adopt Spark.
So you probably have noticed, over the last year, we've been announcing all kinds of things
with Databricks.
One of the key things, obviously, where Sparkly R and Spark Connect and support for that.
But we have also been making changes on our commercial product.
So the first commercial product that we have supporting this is something called Posit
Workbench, which gives you sort of a server-based authoring environment that supports RStudio,
Jupyter Notebook, JupyterLab, VS Code, and ties into the authentication and authorization
of those systems.
And so you basically get the full power of the governance that you have in Databricks,
but having it surface to the data scientists.
You can expect that over the coming year, there'll be more commercial products and open
source tools that will have those tighter integrations with the Databricks stack.
If you're at all curious or interested, feel free to check out any of these links to learn
about how we're working more with Spark and Spark Connect and how we're working with Databricks.
Thank you very much.
All right.
Thank you, Tarif.
The reason I'm so excited about Spark Connect is that it makes frameworks like Spark VR
possible.
It makes it easy to use, makes it easy to adopt, easy to upgrade, easy to build.
And this really ultimately benefits all the developers, all the data scientists, all the
data engineers out there, because now they can use whatever language they're most comfortable
with.
It doesn't require all of those to be built into Spark.
You will get idiomatic R on Spark.
Now, with Spark Connect, it's really trying to solve this last two problems.
Version upgrades, managing Spark, make it easier to be building non-JBM language bindings.
With that, it brings us to Spark 4.0.
This is actually not a conference in which we'll announce Spark 4.0's release today.
It's actually an upstream open source project working at its own pace, but it is coming
later this year.
To give you a preview of some of the features, just similar to other major version, previous
major version releases of Apache Apsara, there will be thousands of features I can't
possibly go all into today.
But Spark Connect will GA and become the standard in Spark 4.0.
NC SQL will become the standard in Spark 4.0.
There's a lot of other features that we're looking forward to.
But one thing I'm particularly excited about, definitely at this conference, is the opportunity
for the different open source community to be collaborating with each other, especially
when it comes to compute and storage.
So many, many features actually requires co-designing the compute stack, which is where Apache Spark
comes in, as well as the storage stack, which is where Delta Lake, Linux Foundation Delta
Lake and Apache Iceberg come in.
As a matter of fact, many of the features you've heard about at this conference, at
session talks, at keynotes, collations, road tracking, merge performance, variant data
type Shawn talked to you about, type widening, they are not just features in Delta or features
in Iceberg or features in Spark.
They actually require co-thinking about all three projects for them to work.
And this is really a spirit of open source and a spirit of collaboration in open source.
So last week, even though Spark 4.0 is not officially released yet, last week, the Apache
Spark community have officially released Spark 4.0 preview.
It's not the final release, but it gives you a glimpse into what Spark 4.0 will look like.
Please go to the website, check it out, download it, give it a spin, and let us know your feedback.
Thank you very much.
Awesome.
Super excited about Spark 4.0.
I got to say, you got to check it out.
PySpark is amazing these days.
And also all that version management, installing it, managing Spark, it's just so much simpler
these days.
I just tried it a week ago.
You can just go to any terminal and just say pip install PySpark.
And that's it.
It'll just install the whole thing.
It just works.
It's hugely different from, let's say, 10 years ago, where you would have to set up
the servers and the daemons and all of that and configure it and use it in local mode
and all that.
Just pip install PySpark.
OK.
So back to our data intelligence platform roadmap.
We're now reaching towards the end.
But this is the most exciting thing for me.
This project that we're going to talk about next is something that actually a couple years
ago we asked all the top CIOs that use Databricks, what's the number one thing you want Databricks
to do?
And it was a really surprising answer.
It was something that we didn't expect them to say to do.
And since then, we've been super focused on nailing this problem.
So I'm very, very excited to welcome on stage Bilal Islam, who is going to take us through
what we've done there.
Please welcome him.
All right.
Good morning.
So I'll get started.
As it turns out, there are five Bilals at Databricks.
I asked all five to give me a little cheer.
But that was more than five.
So thank you.
OK.
So thank you, Ali, for the introduction.
So we've heard about machine learning.
We've heard about BI.
We've heard about analytics.
And all these amazing things.
And I'm here to tell you that everything you need to know about machine learning is available
on the Databricks website.
So if you want to learn more about machine learning, go to database.databricks.com.
And if you want to learn more about machine learning, go to database.databricks.com.
Go to database.databricks.com.
So thank you, Ali, for the introduction.
So we've heard about machine learning.
We've heard about BI.
We've heard about analytics.
And all these amazing things.
And I'm here to tell you that every single one of them, every thing, starts with good
data.
All right.
How do you get to good data?
Well, there are three steps you have to follow.
And every single one of us, including me, we are traditionally cobbling together lots
of different tools in an ever-increasing tool chain that gets more and more expensive,
Let's go through that real quick.
So Spark, and especially Databricks, is already very good at big data.
As Ronald was telling you, this is the world's biggest big data processing framework.
But as it turns out, a lot of your really valuable data is sometimes in smaller data.
So for example, you may have MySQL, Oracle, Postgres, all these different databases.
They're incredibly valuable.
So you might be setting up Debezium and Kafka and a monitoring stack and a cost management
stack just to get the changes from these systems into Databricks.
Or you might, I'm actually pretty confident that every single one of us is using a CRM
of some kind.
Maybe you're using Salesforce, NetSuite, maybe you use HRMs like Workday and NetSuite, right?
Tons of valuable data in there just waiting to get into Databricks so you can start using
it.
And then once your data is in a data platform like Databricks, the next step, the very next
step is to transform it.
As it turns out, newly ingested data is almost never ready for use by the business.
You have to filter it, you have to aggregate it, you have to append it and clean it.
Lots of technology choices, DBT, a great open source project.
You might have heard about Delta Life Tables and PySpark, Ronald was telling you how popular
it is.
Which one of these do you use?
And again, how do you monitor it?
How do you maintain it?
And once your data is transformed, that's really not even half the battle.
You get the value out of data by actually running your production pipelines in production.
I don't like waking up at 2 in the morning with an alert, so now you have to orchestrate.
So you might be using Airflow.
Great.
Now your tool chain is just expanding just a little bit more.
You're responsible for managing Airflow and its authentication stack and so forth.
And then, of course, you might have to monitor all these things in CloudWatch.
This is unnecessarily complex, and this is inefficient, and it's actually very expensive.
Which is why I am extremely proud to unveil what we're calling Databricks Lakeflow.
This is a new product that's built on a fundamental foundation of Databricks workflows and Delta
Life Tables with a little bit of magic sauce added on.
I'm actually going to start with the magic sauce.
And it gives you one simple, intelligent product for ingestion, transformation, and orchestration.
All right.
Let's get into it.
The very first component of these three components is something we call Lakeflow Connect.
Lakeflow Connect is native to the Lakehouse.
These are native connectors, and when I say they're native and they're high performance,
and they're simple for all these different enterprise applications and databases.
If in the audience today you're using SQL Server, Postgres, a legacy data warehouse,
or you're using these enterprise applications, we're on a mission to make it really simple
to get all of this data into Databricks.
And this is actually powered by Archeon Technology, a company we acquired last year.
So I'll give you a quick demo in a moment, but I actually want to talk about one of our
customers called Insulet.
And Insulet manufactures a very innovative insulin management system called the Omnipod.
And they had a lot of customer support data locked up in Salesforce.
And they're one of our happy customers of Lakeflow Connect.
With that, they're able to get to the used to spend days on getting insights.
Now they have it down to minutes.
It's super exciting.
All right.
So actions speak louder than words.
So let's take a look.
All right.
So you're in Lakeflow here.
And what I'm going to do is I'm going to click on ingest.
And you see it's pointing click, which is pretty awesome.
And it's designed for everybody.
I'm going to click on Salesforce.
And my friend Eric Orgren has set up a connection.
By the way, everything in Lakeflow is governed by Unity Catalog and is secured by Unity.
So you can manage it very easily and govern it.
And there are three steps.
And now, OK, great.
So now I see these objects from Salesforce.
And I'm going to choose orders.
I actually work for Casey.
I don't know if you remember her cookie company.
I'm building the data pipeline.
She's my CEO.
So I'm going to bring in some order information for our ever-growing cookie business into
this catalog and schema.
And hang on a second.
There we go.
And within seconds, data should show up in our lake house.
Excellent.
All right.
That's it.
That's all it took.
There are no more steps.
All right.
Let's get back to slides.
So I want to do something here and kind of give you a peek behind the curtain.
We're all engineers here.
And there's actually something pretty magical that's happening inside of Lakeflow Connect.
You might think, gosh, how hard could it be to connect to these APIs and these databases?
Can't you run a SQL query?
It turns out that what you actually want to do is only obtain the new data, the changed
data capture from these source systems, from these databases and enterprise applications.
And as it turns out, this is a really, really hard problem.
You don't want to tip over the source database.
You don't want to exhaust API limits.
The data has to arrive in order.
It has to be applied in order.
Things go wrong.
It's the real world.
And you're coupling systems together.
And you have to be able to recover.
All of this is undifferentiated heavy lifting.
And I'm really glad that we're doing it, because with Archeon Tech, CDC is no longer
a three-letter word.
It's point and click.
It's automated operations.
And it's consistent and reliable.
Super exciting.
All right.
Let's go to the second part of this product, the second component.
What happens once you bring in data?
You're now able to load data from these databases and enterprise applications.
And the very next thing you have to do is to transform it, which is to prepare it.
Remember, you have to filter, aggregate, join, and clean it.
Typically, this involves writing really complicated programs that have to deal with a lot of error
conditions.
And I'll show you that in a moment.
The magic trick behind Lakeflow Pipelines, because it's built on the foundation, it's
the evolution of Delta Life Tables, is that it lets you write plain SQL to express both
batch and streaming.
And the magic trick is we turn that into an incremental, efficient, and cost-effective
pipeline.
All right.
Interview on CloudFlows 2022
Mike
Go ahead and create a little bit of an aggregation out of that.
Okay, so let me show you how simple that is within Lakeflow.
One of my favorite features here, by the way,
is that it's one single unified canvas.
So this little DAG at the bottom, you always see it.
You can hide it if you want,
but I'm going to click here on Salesforce
and I'm going to write a transformation.
Okay, that's simple.
Now, this is an intelligent application.
It's built on the data intelligence platform,
so I might just go ahead and ask the assistant
what it thinks I should join.
Okay, it comes up with a pretty reasonable join.
It says you can join these tables,
and I'm just going to let it figure out how to join them,
figure out the key for me, and that's pretty awesome.
Okay, that looks about right.
It found the customer ID key.
I'm going to go ahead and accept that,
and let me just run this transformation real quick.
I don't have to deploy it. I can run it in development,
and it'll actually give me the ability to debug it real quick.
Okay, perfect.
So I can see that I have orders, dates, products, customers.
All of this came together really nicely.
I have a nice little sample of data.
Perfect. All right, so we can go back to slides now.
Okay.
Woo!
Thank you.
That was one of the belals. Okay, great.
So again, I'm going to give you a little bit of a peek
behind the curtain here, why is this pretty amazing.
Notice that in this, there was no cluster.
There was no compute.
I didn't have to set up infrastructure.
I didn't have to write a long script.
I just wrote SQL,
and this is the power of declarative transformations.
This here is actually my valuable transformation,
and instead, without Lakeflow Pipelines,
you have to do table management.
You have to do incrementalization many, many times,
and even have to deal with schema evolution.
I've spoken with some of our customers.
They've written entire frameworks
to do schema evolution and schema management.
Again, that's undifferentiated, hard, heavy lifting.
Why should you spend time on that, right?
This beast just grows and goes,
and Lakeflow Pipelines are powered
by something called materialized views,
and they're magical because they automatically handle
the bookkeeping for you.
They handle schema evolution.
They handle failures and retries and backfills,
and they magically choose the right way
to incrementalize your data, so it's pretty awesome.
Okay, now, you might be thinking,
hey, that's pretty great,
but you just wrote a couple of lines of SQL.
My pipelines are more complicated,
so in my world, my CEO, my cookie CEO,
is really demanding our e-commerce website.
It's just really taking off,
and now we need to be able to do
real-time actions on our website,
so from this pipeline, this pipeline which looks like Batch,
I'm going to add some streaming to it.
I'm going to go ahead and write some
joined and enriched records into Kafka,
so let me show you how easy that is,
and let's take a look at that.
Great, so remember, this is my pipeline here.
I did this materialized view, a transformation,
so again, from this unified canvas,
I just add a pipeline step, and I'm going to go live here.
I'm going to write some code, okay,
so I'm going to create something called a sink.
Think of a sink as a destination.
I'm just going to call it Kafka
because I'm going to write to Kafka,
and all I have to do is, this is kind of cool
because all I'm doing is writing SQL here,
and I'm going to point this at Kafka.databricks.com,
and that should be enough to create a sink,
and all the credentials are coming through Unity Catalog,
so this is, again, governed,
and I'm going to create something called a flow,
and a flow, think of that as an edge
that writes changes into Kafka.
I'm going to do target Kafka,
and I'm going to select from the sales table
that I just created, and I'm going to use
the table changes table value function.
Okay, something's not right here,
and I need to do dev.
Great, okay, so this looks good,
and remember, this is what looks like a batch pipeline,
and I'm going to turn this into streaming.
There we go, and just like that,
our data's in Kafka.
Let's go to Slides.
And this is something super exciting.
There is no code change here.
I didn't have to make a change.
I didn't have to choose another stack.
Everything just works together.
One of the coolest things we're doing
is something called real-time mode for streaming.
You can think of this as real-time mode for streaming
makes streaming go really, really fast,
and the magic trick here, it's not fast once or twice.
It's consistently fast, so if you have
operational streaming use case where you have
to deliver data and insights, just turn it on,
and this pipeline will go really, really fast,
and we have talks about it.
Ryan Neonhaus is doing a talk on it,
so please go check it out.
Perfect, so now I have ingested data
from SQL Server and Salesforce.
I have very quickly built a pipeline
that is able to deliver batch and streaming results.
It's always fresh.
I didn't have to do manual orchestration,
but now my CEO is very demanding.
The cookie business continues to grow,
and Casey wants insights, and she wants a dashboard
that she can use to figure out how her business is doing,
and this is where orchestration comes in,
and orchestration is really how do I do
all the other things that are not involved
with loading data and transforming data,
such as building a dashboard and running it
or refreshing a dashboard.
One of my favorite capabilities in Databricks
is something called Databricks Workflows,
and we've evolved it into the next generation,
and Workflows is a drop-in complete orchestrator.
No need to use Airflow.
Airflow is great, but it's completely included
in Databricks, and this is just a list of innovations.
It has lots of capabilities that you might be used to
in traditional orchestrators.
Okay, so what I'm gonna do here now
is I'm gonna walk over, and I'm going to start
building a dashboard, and I'm going to run it
after my pipeline is done.
Okay, let's take a look.
Okay, so remember, I have data going into Kafka.
I have all this.
I'm going to just add another step.
I love this unified canvas.
It's like a really nice context on where I am,
and this is super cool,
the Assistant Suggested Dashboard.
That's pretty cool, actually useful.
Remedy and Product Insights, I like that.
That's what I would have wanted,
and let me hide that a little bit,
and there it is.
That's our dashboard.
So hey, good news.
Our cookie business continues to grow.
We're not all the way done with the business,
and this is super cool.
We actually have a really interesting insight here
that sugar cookies tend to sell in the month of December,
so super cool.
So that's it.
You don't have to do anything else.
Let's get back to slides.
So I'm gonna wrap up really quickly.
I'm super excited about one innovation
that I think will make our lives as data teams
and data engineers much, much better.
Look, it's great to create DAGs,
things that run after another.
It's great to have schedules.
When should something run?
But as your organization grows,
what you really want are triggers,
and triggers, think of them as work happens
when new data arrives or data's updated,
and this is actually what allows us
to do another magic trick,
which is run your pipeline exactly when it's needed,
when upstream tables are changed,
when upstream files are ready.
This is super cool.
It's completely available in the product.
It's actually a foundational block of Lakeflow jobs.
Perfect, so now everything is running.
I've ingested data.
I have transformed it.
I've built a dashboard.
My pipeline's running in production.
Like I said, I hate waking up in the middle of the night,
and typically I have to glue together
a lot of different tools to see cost and performance.
Lakeflow includes unified monitoring.
It includes unified monitoring for data health,
data freshness, cost, runs,
and you can debug to your heart's content,
but it has that single pane of glass
so you don't have to if you don't want to.
Lakeflow is built on the Databricks Intelligence Platform.
It's native to it.
This gives us a bunch of superpowers.
You get full lineage through Unity Catalog.
That includes ingested data,
so all the data upstream from Salesforce
or Workday or MySQL, we already captured the lineage.
It includes federated data.
It includes dashboards, even ML models,
not a single line of code needed.
It's built on top of serverless compute.
Frees you up from managing clusters,
managing instances, how many executors,
which type of instance should I use?
It's serverless, it's secure,
and completely connected to Unity.
So it frees you up from that hassle,
but what's also really cool about it
is that we did this benchmark.
This is real data for streaming ingest.
It's three and a half times faster,
and it's 30% more cost effective.
So that's, you know, have your cake and eat it too.
It's super exciting.
сама웃
Data intelligence is not just a buzz word.
As you have seen in the last couple of days,
it's actually foundational to Databricks.
It's also foundational to LakeFle to.
LakeFle includes a complete integration
with Databricks, IQ, and the Assistant,
so every time you're writing code,
every time you're building a DAG,
every time you're ingesting data,
we're here to help you author, monitor, and diagnose.
And one last thing, this is actually an evolution
of our existing product, so you can confidently
keep using Delta Life Tables and workflows.
We'll make sure that everything is backwards compatible,
all your jobs and pipelines will continue to work,
and you can start enjoying LakeFle.
So, LakeFle is here.
We're actually doing a talk, Elise and Peter
are doing a talk on LakeFle Connect, I think, very soon.
LakeFle Connect is in preview.
Please join us, give us feedback
on what connectors you want, we're very excited about it.
Pipelines and jobs are coming soon.
All right, I think that's it, thank you.
All right, that was awesome, Bilal the Fourth.
Sounds like a king.
That was super, super awesome.
What I really loved about that is,
I don't know if you noticed it, this is actually a big deal.
So, Spark has micro-batch architecture,
so things take, when you're trying to stream things,
it takes a couple seconds, sometimes five, six seconds.
What it showed you, real-time mode, that we now have,
real-time mode gets it down to 10, 20 milliseconds,
so it's like a 100x improvement.
The P99th percentile of latency is around 100 milliseconds,
so it's kind of a game-changer.
And then, of course, we saw Connect,
you can get your data in there,
you can do incrementalization, you don't have to worry
about getting the logic right, it'll just do it for you.
So, super exciting.
Okay, awesome, so I just wanna wrap this up quickly.
So, on the top row there,
you see the announcements from yesterday,
I'm not gonna bore you and go through those again.
On the bottom row, you can see what we did today.
So, we just heard data engineering, so you saw that.
Unity Catalog, open source, live on stage by Matei,
that was super cool.
But also, metrics, I'm excited about metrics.
Every company has KPIs.
How do we have certified KPIs that we can rely on,
and that we know are semantically correct,
and we know how to compute them, so that's also a big deal.
And then, we heard about Delta Lake 4.0,
and Project Uniform going GA.
So, lots and lots of great stuff, and that's it for today.
Hope you enjoy your lunch,
and then, please go to the sessions,
they're super, super awesome.
Thank you, everyone, thanks.